Corporations Cause Incompetence
November 1st, 2024

The Current State of Corporations

Let me begin this post with a little story.
I once worked for a large company as a summer student.
One day while I was working, I wanted to take a break and do a little exploration of the business' infrastructure.
I ended up finding a massive cyber security vulnerability.
I quickly brought this issue up with the head of IT.
He proceeded to ignore all of my messages and emails.
The only person who actually seemed interested in helping is the senior IT specialist.
I then starting building a demo-virus with an empty payload so that we can see if my security speculations were true.
They were.
The resulting damage from this virus could have been in the billions of dollars, 
and would affect the jobs of thousands of people.
To this very day it has never been fixed.
I reported and built a fully functioning virus that is capable of destroying a multi-billion dollar trans-national corporation in my first month on the job.
The senior IT specialist was no help, as in his own words "you probably know more than the head of corporate IT."
Now obviously I am not that good;
cyber security is probably my weakest field in the domain of computer science.
But, the very fact that I did this and nobody at the company could even compare shows you how incompetent people are.
Things then went back to usual as if nothing had changed.
Why am I, an extremely talented programmer, printing, stamping, and emailing paperwork,
when I could be solving real problems?
Especially after I have proven myself.

nope.gif

What Really is Competence?

For future clarity, I'd like to define competence as an individual's ability to conduct themselves within the workplace. 
Competence is not merely the possession of the skills and knowledge required to complete tasks.
Competence is both the skill, knowledge, experience, social connections, sociability, and so much more.
As an addition and more rigid yet relative definition: 
a more competent employee is someone who can complete tasks faster, more efficiently, and of a higher quality than a less competent employee.

What Really is Education

I define education as the process of instilling knowledge and wisdom into another individual.
I define knowledge as both the theoretical and practical understanding of a subject.
I define wisdom as the ability to gain knowledge through inference of multiple subjects related subjects.
Without knowledge, an individual cannot hope to do anything.
With abounding wisdom comes abounding growth of knowledge.

Studium Prope Mortuum Iam Est

As long as I can remember, 
I have been scrutinizing and agonizing over institutions that mirror corporate hierarchies, such as schools, which I was required to participate in.
Although many people believe that schools produce educated individuals, 
the results of the education system are clear in most people:
killing their drive for learning, replacing actual learning with glorified trivia, and replacing problem solving with instructions.
They kill their drive for learning by torturing students with either 
hours of theoretical nonsense not applicable in the lives of most adults,
or it is dated and often incorrect scientific, political, or historical information.
Both of which have additional mounds of useless work piled on after students leave school.
Instead of actually learning about countries around the world, they learn to name them all.
Instead of actually learning about important elements on the periodic table and how they interact with the world, students learn to name them all.
Science and social studies classes are literally just trivia with occasional rudimentary math skills.
Why do we send our future citizens to trivia classes for twelve years of their life?
I thought game shows were a 70s and 80s thing.

Industrialized Education

The modern system of education was created to create factory workers.
You show up from *x* o'clock to *y* o'clock, 5 days a week.
You sit in rows, speak when spoken to, and have a clear corporate structure.
You work, eat lunch, and go home all on the whim of a bell. 
It is clearly built to produce factory workers.
Now I'm not here to belittle factory workers,
rather I'm stating that there is much more work than just factories.
As stated earlier, this industrialized system is extremely damaging to a persons actual education.

I believe that this system has become a social contagion.
Once this industrialized system came into effect, 
it was so effective at perpetuating itself that humans can't resist against it.
It is so hard to independently discover the reality of the shortcomings of the current education system
when you are raised in it.

For a while, this made me very bitter.
I was angry with people for their lack of education because they couldn't resist this idea.
After a decade of thinking and reading about this issue, 
I have realized that it is not solely an individual's fault for being unable to resist.
It is the fault of a quirk of human hierarchology.

Laurence Peter

I do not know much about the Canadian hierarchologist, Laurence Peter, 
but my recent discovery of one of his ideas has solved this fundamental question I held.
I am honestly embarrassed that it turns out that it is this simple,
but I am still a very young man and have not yet had to fully interact with the Hell that is the corporate ladder.

laurence-j-peter.jpg

Here is the description of the Peter principle taken from wikipedia,
as I must admit that my style of writing can exacerbate already esoteric topics.

"The Peter principle states that a person who is competent at their job will earn a promotion to a position that requires different skills.
If the promoted person lacks the skills required for the new role, they will be incompetent at the new level, and will not be promoted again.
If the person is competent in the new role, they will be promoted again and will continue to be promoted until reaching a level at which they are incompetent.
Being incompetent, the individual will not qualify for promotion again, and so will remain stuck at this final placement or Peter's plateau."

The Outcome of the Corporate World

There are a variety of things that are caused by corporate structures, 
but the main two -- in relation to the Peter Principle -- are namely:

Development of any learning skills are completely impeded

Employers do not promote primarily on the basis of competence [both skills, knowledge, experience, and sociability]. 
If competence is not the primary selection factor, then it implies that other factors are being selected for.
Competence is the only essential quality which matters in the workplace.
If you were to remove the quality of competence from the substance of a particular worker
and perfected all other qualities -- only the qualities, of course, which do not interfere with the quality of competence --
you still would not have a viable worker because they are still incompetent.

Exceptional people can no longer be understood.

I shall explain this point with a personal anecdote.
I previously worked for a large company as a summer student writing Visual Basic macros and pushing paperwork,
when I stumbled upon a large security issue. 
I brought this issue up with the head of IT, 
who never replied to any of my messages or emails.
The only person who actually seemed interested in helping is the senior IT specialist.
I then starting building a demo-virus with an empty payload so that we can see if my security speculations were true.
They were.
The resulting damage from this virus could have been in the billions of dollars, 
and would affect the jobs of thousands of people.
To this very day it has never fixed.
I reported and built a fully functioning virus that is capable of destroying a multi-billion trans-national corporation in my first month on the job.
The senior IT specialist was no help, as in his own words "you probably know more than the head of corporate IT."
Now obviously I am not that good
as cyber security is probably my weakest field in the domain of computer science,
but the very fact that I did this and nobody at the company could even compare shows you how incompetent people are.
Why am I a summer student printing, stamping, and emailing paperwork when I could be solving this real problem?

The Problem with Successive-Generations

Before you were born, your parents had two or three decades to themselves before deciding to bring you into this world.
You and your parents are both effected equally by the two previous points I mentioned earlier, 
but you suffer a far worse fate.
All those consequences that should have only effected your parents ultimately affect you, as you are a product of their upbringing.

Works Cited

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_principle#Summary"

